---
subtitle: "UMIvar: Unveiling Insights in UMI Deduplication Software Benchmarking through UMI-aware Variant Simulation"
---
## Introduction

The use of Unique Molecular Identifiers (UMIs) has proven to hold great value in NGS, specially in liquid biopsy samples for low-depth settings such as whole-exome sequencing, where it aids in the detection of low-frequency variants. However, the comparative benefit of using different UMI deduplication software in variant calling has not been thoroughly investigated, partially due a lack of accessible ground truth resources with UMI information. To address this, we developed UMIvar, a tool that simulates UMI-aware variants in BAM files specifically designed with convenience and flexibility in mind for the purpose of benchmarking analyses in different data.

## Matherial and method

UMIvar was developed in Python using the pysam library to handle BAM files. The source code and documentation is available at: https://github.com/dgcamblor/UMIvar. UMIvar was firstly tested by generating a set of 1283 variants with allele frequencies (AFs) from 0.01 to 1.00 in 5 different BAM files and performing sensitive variant calling with VarDict. The tool was later used to benchmark the main UMI deduplication software availabe: UMI-tools, fgbio, UMICollapse, gencore, and MarkDuplicates. A set of 621 variants (AFs: 0.01 - 0.10) were simulated in 32 BAM files ranging from 51x to 141x median coverage to provide robustness to the benchmarking. Variant calling was performed on each deduplicated BAM using Lofreq. Results were compared to those obtained in the BRP dataset (Sample Ef) from the SEQC2 Liquid Biopsy study, which contains 230 true variants (median AF = 0.2; median coverage range: 5231X - 5942X).

## Results and discussion

UMIvar proved to accurately simulate the initial 1283 variants, with a global root mean square error of 0.106 for AF differences (which are explained by the UMI availability and discarding of unfit reads). In the benchmarking analysis, fgbio provided the best performance of mean recall with Lofreq, of 0.784 +- 0.039. Results were consistent with the BRP dataset, where fgbio again surpassed the other UMI deduplication software with a recall of 0.809 +- 0.035.

## Conclusion

UMIvar emerges as a valuable tool for benchmarking UMI-related software, providing the ability to simulate UMI-aware variants in any kind of BAM file. The benchmarking analysis showed that fgbio offers the best performance in terms of true variant recall. 