---
tags:
  - daily
---

Problem in the UMI extraction to header step for the [[Comparative analysis of UMI deduplication software in variant calling error correction (planning)]].

- Paired-end reads have different starting 6 nts (supposedly, the UMI).
- UMI-tools `extract` for paired-ends works by extracting UMI in R1, and using **the same** for R2.
- **Solution:** using both `--bc-pattern` and `--bcpattern2`.

## On AdaBoost

[AdaBoost, Clearly Explained - YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LsK-xG1cLYA&t=90s)

Random Forest -> Each tree is equally important
Ada Boost -> Some trees more important

1) AdaBoost combines stumps ("weak learners")

Sample Weight. All samples are initially equally important.

Gini Index is calculated for all of the initial stumps. Total error is used to determine how much a certain stump weighs in a final decision. When the error has low error (< 0.5), the weight will be positive. When the stump has high error (> 0.5), the weight will be negative (predicting the opposite). When near 0, the stump as low weight.

The samples that were classified incorrectly by the initial stump are given more weight, to "emphasize" the need for the next stump to classify it correctly. All the other sample weights are decreased accordingly.

For the wrongly classified samples:

$$
New\ Sample\ Weight = Old\ Sample\ Weight \times e^{Amount of Say of the Stump}
$$

For the correctly classified samples:

$$
New\ Sample\ Weight = Old\ Sample\ Weight \times e^{-Amount of Say of the Stump}
$$

Weighs are normalized to sum to 1.

To create the next stump, the samples are sampled with replacement, with the probability of being sampled proportional to their weight. Or a Weighted Gini Index is calculated.